A cached thread pool is a type of ExecutorService in Java provided by the Executors utility class. It dynamically creates new threads as needed, and reuses previously constructed threads when they are available. If a thread remains idle for a specified time period, it is terminated and removed from the pool.

import java.util.concurrent.ExecutorService;
import java.util.concurrent.Executors;

public class CachedThreadPoolExample {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // Create a cached thread pool
        ExecutorService executor = Executors.newCachedThreadPool();

        // Submit tasks to the thread pool
        for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
            final int taskId = i;
            executor.submit(() -> {
                System.out.println("Task " + taskId + " executed by thread: " + Thread.currentThread().getName());
            });
        }

        // Shutdown the executor service
        executor.shutdown();
    }
}


We create a cached thread pool using Executors.newCachedThreadPool().
We submit tasks to the thread pool using the submit method of the ExecutorService.
Each task is represented by a lambda expression that prints a message indicating its execution and the name of the thread executing it.
Finally, we shut down the executor service to release its resources.
Key characteristics of a cached thread pool:

Dynamic Size: The cached thread pool creates new threads as needed and reuses existing threads when available. If a thread remains idle for a certain time period (default is 60 seconds), it is terminated and removed from the pool.
Unbounded Pool Size: The cached thread pool does not have a fixed size limit. It can create as many threads as required to execute submitted tasks.
Suitable for Short-lived Tasks: Cached thread pools are suitable for executing short-lived tasks, such as asynchronous I/O operations or event-driven tasks.
Resource Management: Since cached thread pools create and terminate threads dynamically, they are efficient in terms of resource management. However, they may lead to resource contention if too many tasks are submitted simultaneously and the system runs out of available threads.
Cached thread pools are useful when you have a large number of short-lived tasks to execute concurrently and want to avoid the overhead of thread creation and termination. However, they may not be suitable for long-running tasks or tasks that require strict resource management due to their unbounded nature.

The main difference between a cached thread pool and a regular (fixed-size) thread pool lies in how they manage threads:

Dynamic Size vs. Fixed Size:

Cached Thread Pool: It dynamically adjusts the number of threads based on the workload. If a thread is available in the pool, it will be reused; otherwise, a new thread will be created. Threads that remain idle for a certain time (usually 60 seconds) are terminated and removed from the pool.
Regular (Fixed-Size) Thread Pool: It maintains a fixed number of threads throughout its lifecycle. Once created, these threads are kept alive until the thread pool is explicitly shutdown. If all threads are busy when a new task is submitted, the task is queued until a thread becomes available.
Resource Usage:

Cached Thread Pool: Since the number of threads in a cached thread pool can grow or shrink dynamically, it can potentially consume more system resources (CPU and memory) compared to a regular thread pool, especially when there's a burst of tasks.
Regular (Fixed-Size) Thread Pool: It pre-allocates a fixed number of threads regardless of the workload. While this can lead to more predictable resource usage, it may also result in underutilization of resources if the workload varies significantly.
Suitability:

Cached Thread Pool: Ideal for scenarios with a large number of short-lived tasks or asynchronous I/O operations, where the number of threads needed can vary dynamically based on the workload. It's efficient for handling tasks that require quick execution and do not impose a heavy burden on system resources.
Regular (Fixed-Size) Thread Pool: Suitable for scenarios where the number of concurrent tasks is known in advance or when there's a need to limit resource usage (e.g., to prevent resource contention or overload). It provides more control over resource allocation and can help prevent resource exhaustion in long-running applications.
Performance Considerations:

Cached Thread Pool: Offers better scalability and responsiveness in scenarios with a highly dynamic workload, as it can quickly adapt to changes in demand by creating or terminating threads on-the-fly. However, excessive thread creation and termination overhead may impact performance if the workload fluctuates frequently.
Regular (Fixed-Size) Thread Pool: Provides more predictable performance characteristics since the number of threads is fixed, reducing the overhead associated with thread creation and termination. It's well-suited for applications with stable workloads or where resource constraints are a concern.
In summary, the choice between a cached thread pool and a regular thread pool depends on factors such as the nature of the workload, expected concurrency levels, resource availability, and performance requirements. Each type of thread pool has its own advantages and trade-offs, and the decision should be based on the specific requirements and constraints of the application.